Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
carbon dioxide carriage and blood buffering.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
In what forms is carbon dioxide carried in the blood?
Carbon dioxide, the product of metabolism,
is carried from the tissues to the lungs in the blood in three forms,
in differing proportions.
The largest fraction, about sixty per cent of the total carried,
travels as bicarbonate, formed when carbon dioxide combines with water to give
carbonic acid, which dissociates to bicarbonate and a hydrogen ion.
A second fraction, about thirty per cent,
is carried in combination with the amino groups of proteins, chiefly haemoglobin,
as carbamino compounds, principally carbamino-haemoglobin.
The remaining tenth or so is carried simply dissolved in the plasma,
in proportion to its partial pressure by Henry's law;
carbon dioxide being far more soluble than oxygen,
this dissolved fraction is more significant than for oxygen and is the form that
exerts the partial pressure.
So carbon dioxide is carried in three forms: most as bicarbonate,
from its hydration and dissociation;
a substantial part as carbamino compounds bound to haemoglobin;
and the remainder dissolved — the bicarbonate route predominating,
and these forms together transporting carbon dioxide from tissues to lungs while
linking carriage to acid-base balance.
Describe the role of carbonic anhydrase and the chloride shift.
The conversion of carbon dioxide to bicarbonate, though chemically simple,
is slow in plain solution, so it is greatly accelerated within the red cell by the
enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which catalyses the hydration of carbon dioxide to
carbonic acid; this is why most bicarbonate is formed inside the red cell rather
than the plasma.
As carbon dioxide enters the red cell in the tissues and is hydrated,
the carbonic acid dissociates into bicarbonate and hydrogen ions.
The hydrogen ions are buffered by haemoglobin,
while the bicarbonate accumulates and diffuses out of the red cell into the plasma
down its gradient.
To preserve electrical neutrality as the negative bicarbonate leaves,
chloride ions move into the red cell in exchange — the chloride shift,
or Hamburger phenomenon. In the lungs the whole process reverses.
So carbonic anhydrase within the red cell rapidly hydrates carbon dioxide to
carbonic acid, which dissociates to bicarbonate — buffered hydrogen ions remaining
— and as bicarbonate leaves the cell, chloride enters to maintain neutrality,
the chloride shift; the reactions reversing in the lung,
an elegant coupling of enzyme and ion exchange.
Describe the carbon dioxide dissociation curve and compare it with that for oxygen.
The carbon dioxide dissociation curve describes the relationship between the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide and the total carbon dioxide content of the
blood.
Plotted with the carbon dioxide content on the vertical axis against the partial
pressure of carbon dioxide on the horizontal axis,
it differs from the oxygen curve in two important ways.
First, it is much more nearly linear over the physiological range,
without the sigmoid plateau of the oxygen curve,
so the content keeps rising with partial pressure;
this means carbon dioxide content responds steadily to changes in its tension,
important for its elimination.
Second, it is steeper, and the blood holds a much larger total quantity of carbon
dioxide than of oxygen. The position of the carbon dioxide curve is influenced by
oxygenation — the Haldane effect — deoxygenated blood carrying more carbon dioxide
at a given tension.
So the carbon dioxide dissociation curve relates carbon dioxide content to its
partial pressure and is, unlike the oxygen curve,
nearly linear and steeper over the physiological range, with no plateau,
so content rises steadily with tension;
its position shifts with oxygenation by the Haldane effect — a curve suited to the
steady transport and elimination of carbon dioxide.
What is the Haldane effect?
The Haldane effect is the influence of the oxygenation of haemoglobin on its
carriage of carbon dioxide: deoxygenated haemoglobin carries more carbon dioxide
than oxygenated haemoglobin at the same partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
It is, in a sense, the counterpart of the Bohr effect.
It arises because deoxygenated haemoglobin is a better proton acceptor — a weaker
acid — so it more readily takes up the hydrogen ions generated when carbon dioxide
is converted to bicarbonate, promoting that conversion,
and it also more readily forms carbamino compounds with carbon dioxide.
The physiological value is that it aids carbon dioxide transport just where needed:
in the tissues, as haemoglobin gives up oxygen and becomes deoxygenated,
its capacity to carry carbon dioxide rises,
helping it pick up the carbon dioxide produced; in the lungs,
as it takes up oxygen, it releases carbon dioxide.
So the Haldane effect is the increased carbon dioxide carriage by deoxygenated
haemoglobin, because deoxyhaemoglobin better accepts hydrogen ions and forms
carbamino compounds; it aids carbon dioxide uptake in the tissues and its release
in the lungs — the carriage of the two gases being elegantly coupled through the
Bohr and Haldane effects.
What is a buffer, and describe the bicarbonate buffer system.
A buffer is a solution that resists changes in pH when acid or alkali is added,
minimising the change, and it consists of a weak acid together with its conjugate
base; it works because the pair can take up or release hydrogen ions to oppose a
change in their concentration.
The most important buffer of the extracellular fluid is the bicarbonate system —
the weak acid carbonic acid, in equilibrium with dissolved carbon dioxide,
together with its conjugate base, bicarbonate.
Its behaviour is described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:
the pH equals the pK-a plus the logarithm to base ten of the ratio of the
bicarbonate concentration to the concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide,
the latter being the product of the partial pressure and the solubility.
This system is especially powerful physiologically because it is open:
the carbon dioxide is regulated by the lungs and the bicarbonate by the kidneys,
so both components are independently controlled.
So a buffer resists pH change, being a weak acid and its conjugate base;
the bicarbonate system — carbonic acid and bicarbonate,
described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation — is the chief extracellular
buffer, and is uniquely powerful because its carbon dioxide and bicarbonate are
independently regulated by lungs and kidneys.
What are the other buffers of the blood?
Besides the bicarbonate system, the blood and body fluids contain other buffers
that contribute to resisting changes in pH,
important because each operates best near its own pK-a and in its own location.
Within the red cell, haemoglobin is a major buffer,
particularly effective because it is abundant and because,
as we have seen in the Haldane effect,
its buffering capacity changes helpfully with oxygenation;
the imidazole groups of its histidine residues do much of the buffering.
The plasma proteins also buffer, through their ionisable groups.
The phosphate buffer system, the pair of dihydrogen and monohydrogen phosphate,
is relatively minor in the blood but important within cells and in the urine,
where it helps excrete acid.
Bone provides a slow, large-capacity buffer for chronic acid loads.
So besides bicarbonate, the blood is buffered by haemoglobin — the major
intracellular buffer, its capacity varying usefully with oxygenation — by the
plasma proteins, and, more in cells and urine, by phosphate,
with bone buffering chronic loads; the buffers acting together across the
compartments to defend pH.
How does carbon dioxide carriage relate to acid-base balance?
Carbon dioxide carriage and acid-base balance are intimately linked,
because carbon dioxide is, in effect, an acid: through the bicarbonate system,
carbon dioxide combines with water to form carbonic acid,
which yields hydrogen ions, so the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is a
determinant of pH.
This makes the lungs a key regulator of acid-base balance:
by adjusting alveolar ventilation, the body controls the elimination of carbon
dioxide and so its partial pressure,
raising or lowering the pH within minutes — the respiratory component.
Hyperventilation lowers carbon dioxide and raises pH;
hypoventilation does the reverse. The kidney provides slower,
longer-term control by regulating the bicarbonate.
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation expresses how pH depends on the ratio of
bicarbonate to carbon dioxide, so disturbances are classified by which is primarily
affected.
So carbon dioxide carriage is central to acid-base balance because carbon dioxide
acts as an acid through the bicarbonate system,
making ventilation a rapid regulator of pH by controlling carbon dioxide,
complemented by renal control of bicarbonate — the basis of respiratory and
metabolic acid-base disturbances and their compensation.
What is the relevance of carbon dioxide carriage and buffering to anaesthesia?
Carbon dioxide carriage and buffering are of constant relevance to anaesthesia,
because the anaesthetist controls ventilation and must manage acid-base balance.
Because carbon dioxide elimination depends on alveolar ventilation,
the anaesthetist directly determines the arterial carbon dioxide and so a major
component of pH; under- or over-ventilation produces respiratory acidosis or
alkalosis, with their physiological consequences on, for example,
cerebral blood flow and the position of the oxygen dissociation curve.
Capnography, the measurement of exhaled carbon dioxide, is a fundamental monitor,
confirming ventilation and tracheal placement and reflecting the carbon dioxide
carriage and elimination just described.
The buffering systems determine how the body resists the acid-base disturbances
common in the perioperative period, and their interpretation,
through the bicarbonate system, guides management.
So carbon dioxide carriage and buffering are central to anaesthesia through the
control of ventilation, which sets arterial carbon dioxide and a major part of
acid-base balance; through capnography as a key monitor;
and through the buffering systems that underlie the acid-base disturbances the
anaesthetist must interpret and manage.
Pull it together: trace carbon dioxide from the tissue to the alveolus.
I would trace it as the reverse counterpart of the oxygen journey,
coupled to it at every step. Carbon dioxide is produced in the tissues and diffuses
down its partial-pressure gradient into the blood.
There it is carried in three forms: a small amount dissolved,
a portion as carbamino compounds on haemoglobin,
and most as bicarbonate — the carbon dioxide entering the red cell,
where carbonic anhydrase rapidly hydrates it,
the carbonic acid dissociating to bicarbonate,
which leaves the cell in exchange for chloride, the chloride shift,
while the hydrogen ions are buffered by haemoglobin.
This carriage is enhanced because the deoxygenated haemoglobin in the tissues
carries carbon dioxide better — the Haldane effect.
In the lungs everything reverses: as haemoglobin takes up oxygen,
it releases carbon dioxide, the bicarbonate is reconverted to carbon dioxide by
carbonic anhydrase, and the carbon dioxide diffuses into the alveolus to be exhaled.
So carbon dioxide travels from tissue to alveolus carried mainly as bicarbonate
formed by carbonic anhydrase, with carbamino and dissolved fractions,
aided by the Haldane effect, and is released and exhaled in the lung — a transport
system coupled to oxygen carriage and to acid-base balance.
How are acid-base disturbances classified?
Acid-base disturbances are classified by reference to the bicarbonate buffer system
and the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship,
according to whether the primary problem is respiratory or metabolic,
and whether it produces an acidosis or an alkalosis.
A respiratory disturbance is a primary change in the carbon dioxide:
a respiratory acidosis is a rise in carbon dioxide from inadequate ventilation,
lowering the pH; a respiratory alkalosis is a fall in carbon dioxide from
hyperventilation, raising it.
A metabolic disturbance is a primary change in the bicarbonate:
a metabolic acidosis is a fall in bicarbonate,
from the gain of acid or the loss of bicarbonate;
a metabolic alkalosis is a rise in bicarbonate.
Each primary disturbance provokes a compensatory response in the other system,
tending to restore the ratio of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide and so the pH towards
normal.
So acid-base disturbances are classified as respiratory — a primary change in
carbon dioxide — or metabolic — a primary change in bicarbonate — each as an
acidosis or alkalosis, with the partner system compensating;
a framework derived from the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship that underlies the
interpretation of arterial blood gases.
Describe the compensation for acid-base disturbances.
Compensation is the secondary response by which the system not primarily affected
acts to limit the change in pH, by adjusting its component to restore the ratio of
bicarbonate to carbon dioxide, though it does not usually fully correct the pH.
For a primary metabolic disturbance, the respiratory system compensates rapidly,
within minutes to hours: in a metabolic acidosis,
the low pH stimulates ventilation, blowing off carbon dioxide to lower it and raise
the pH back towards normal — the deep breathing of severe acidosis;
in a metabolic alkalosis, ventilation is depressed to retain carbon dioxide.
For a primary respiratory disturbance, the kidney compensates,
more slowly over days, by adjusting bicarbonate:
in a chronic respiratory acidosis it retains bicarbonate to buffer the retained
carbon dioxide.
The slowness of renal compensation is why respiratory disturbances are
distinguished as acute or chronic.
So compensation limits the pH change by the unaffected system adjusting its
component: the lungs compensate for metabolic disturbances rapidly by changing
ventilation and carbon dioxide, and the kidneys compensate for respiratory
disturbances slowly by changing bicarbonate — restoring the ratio towards normal
without usually fully correcting the pH.
What is the anion gap, and why is it useful?
The anion gap is a calculated quantity used in the assessment of a metabolic
acidosis to narrow its cause. It rests on the principle of electrical neutrality —
the total cations and anions in the plasma must be equal — but not all are
routinely measured.
The anion gap is calculated as the difference between the measured principal
cation, sodium, and the measured principal anions, chloride and bicarbonate;
it represents the unmeasured anions,
normally accounted for by the negative charge on the plasma proteins,
and is normally a modest positive value.
Its value is in classifying a metabolic acidosis.
A high anion gap acidosis indicates the addition of an acid whose anion is
unmeasured — as in lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis,
renal failure and certain poisonings — the added anion enlarging the gap.
A normal anion gap acidosis indicates the loss of bicarbonate replaced by chloride,
as in diarrhoea or renal tubular acidosis.
So the anion gap, the difference between measured sodium and the sum of chloride
and bicarbonate, represents unmeasured anions and classifies a metabolic acidosis
into high-gap — from added acid such as lactate or ketones — and normal-gap — from
bicarbonate loss — a useful step in diagnosis.
What is base excess, and how does it help?
Base excess is a quantity, derived from the blood gas analysis,
that quantifies the metabolic component of an acid-base disturbance independently
of the respiratory component, helping to separate the two.
It is defined as the amount of acid or base that would have to be added to a sample
of blood to return its pH to normal,
under standard conditions of carbon dioxide and temperature — so by standardising
the carbon dioxide, it removes the respiratory contribution and isolates the
metabolic.
A negative base excess, a base deficit,
indicates a metabolic acidosis — there is a deficit of base, or an excess of acid;
a positive base excess indicates a metabolic alkalosis.
Its magnitude reflects the severity of the metabolic disturbance,
and it is widely used, for example,
as a marker of the severity of shock and of resuscitation.
The related standard bicarbonate serves a similar purpose.
So base excess is the acid or base needed to restore the pH to normal at a
standardised carbon dioxide, isolating the metabolic component: a negative value,
or base deficit, signifies metabolic acidosis and a positive value metabolic
alkalosis, its magnitude indicating severity — a practical measure of the metabolic
disturbance and of resuscitation.
Describe the effect of carbon dioxide on cerebral blood flow.
The cerebral circulation is exquisitely sensitive to the arterial partial pressure
of carbon dioxide, which is one of its most powerful regulators,
and this has major anaesthetic importance.
Within the normal and moderately abnormal range,
cerebral blood flow varies almost linearly and directly with the arterial carbon
dioxide: a rise in carbon dioxide causes cerebral vasodilatation and increases
cerebral blood flow, while a fall causes vasoconstriction and reduces it.
The mechanism is the effect of carbon dioxide, via the bicarbonate system,
on the pH of the perivascular fluid,
the resulting change in hydrogen-ion concentration acting on the vascular smooth
muscle.
The response is the basis of deliberate manipulation: hyperventilation,
by lowering carbon dioxide, constricts the cerebral vessels and reduces cerebral
blood volume and intracranial pressure,
used acutely in raised intracranial pressure,
though only as a temporary measure because the effect wanes and excessive reduction
risks ischaemia.
So the arterial carbon dioxide powerfully and roughly linearly regulates cerebral
blood flow — a rise dilating and a fall constricting the cerebral vessels through
perivascular pH — the basis of using hyperventilation to reduce intracranial
pressure acutely, an important application in neuroanaesthesia.
Describe carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and their effects.
The enzyme carbonic anhydrase, central to carbon dioxide carriage and to acid-base
handling, is inhibited by the drug acetazolamide,
and considering its effects illuminates the enzyme's many roles.
Carbonic anhydrase is found not only in the red cell but in the kidney, the eye,
the stomach and elsewhere, catalysing the interconversion of carbon dioxide and
bicarbonate wherever rapid handling is needed.
Inhibiting it has several consequences.
In the kidney, it impairs the reabsorption of bicarbonate in the proximal tubule,
causing a loss of bicarbonate in the urine — a mild diuresis and a metabolic
acidosis; this renal effect is exploited to treat glaucoma indirectly and altitude
sickness, and the urinary alkalinisation has uses.
In the eye, it reduces the formation of aqueous humour,
lowering intraocular pressure — its use in glaucoma.
So carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazolamide,
by blocking the enzyme in its many sites,
impair renal bicarbonate reabsorption — causing bicarbonate diuresis and a
metabolic acidosis, useful in altitude sickness — and reduce aqueous humour
formation to lower intraocular pressure in glaucoma;
their effects mapping the enzyme's physiological roles.
What is permissive hypercapnia?
Permissive hypercapnia is a deliberate ventilatory strategy in which a
higher-than-normal arterial carbon dioxide is accepted,
the carbon dioxide being permitted to rise,
in order to avoid the harm of the ventilation that would be needed to keep it
normal.
It arises chiefly in the ventilation of patients with severe lung injury,
such as the acute respiratory distress syndrome, or severe asthma,
where the lungs are stiff or obstructed.
To keep the carbon dioxide normal would require large tidal volumes and high airway
pressures, which are now known to injure the lungs further — ventilator-induced
lung injury.
Lung-protective ventilation therefore uses small tidal volumes and limited
pressures, accepting that this reduces carbon dioxide clearance and allows the
carbon dioxide to rise and the pH to fall,
provided these stay within tolerated limits and severe acidosis is avoided.
The body tolerates a moderate respiratory acidosis.
So permissive hypercapnia is the acceptance of a raised arterial carbon dioxide as
the price of lung-protective ventilation with low tidal volumes and pressures,
to avoid ventilator-induced lung injury in severe lung disease — a strategy trading
a tolerated respiratory acidosis for protection of the lungs.
Describe the carbon dioxide stores and their relevance to apnoea.
The body holds a large store of carbon dioxide, far larger than its oxygen store,
distributed through the blood, the tissues and, in dissolved and bicarbonate form,
throughout the body water, and the size and behaviour of these stores have
practical consequences.
Because the store is so large and the body is well buffered,
the arterial carbon dioxide changes relatively slowly when its production or
elimination is altered, and the stores fill and empty over different timescales.
The relevance to apnoea is twofold.
When ventilation ceases, the arterial carbon dioxide rises,
but only at a limited rate — fastest in the first minute,
then more slowly — because the carbon dioxide produced is taken up into the large
stores; this, together with pre-oxygenation filling the oxygen store,
is what allows a period of apnoea, as in apnoeic oxygenation,
before hypoxia or dangerous hypercapnia.
Conversely, the large store means carbon dioxide cannot be cleared instantly by
hyperventilation.
So the body's carbon dioxide stores are large and well buffered,
so arterial carbon dioxide changes slowly;
in apnoea it rises at a limited rate as carbon dioxide enters the stores, which,
with pre-oxygenation, permits a period of apnoeic oxygenation — a fact of practical
importance in airway management.
Summarise the integration of carbon dioxide transport,
buffering and acid-base control.
I would draw it together around carbon dioxide as the link between metabolism,
respiration and acid-base balance.
Metabolism produces carbon dioxide,
which is carried from the tissues to the lungs chiefly as bicarbonate,
formed by carbonic anhydrase, with carbamino and dissolved fractions,
the carriage aided by the Haldane effect and coupled to oxygen transport through
the Bohr and Haldane effects.
Because carbon dioxide acts as an acid through the bicarbonate system,
it is also the respiratory arm of acid-base balance,
the lungs controlling pH rapidly by adjusting ventilation and so carbon dioxide,
while the kidneys control the bicarbonate slowly;
the two components and the pH are related by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation,
and disturbances are classified and compensated accordingly,
supported by the body's buffers.
The arterial carbon dioxide also regulates cerebral blood flow and is monitored by
capnography.
So carbon dioxide integrates metabolism, respiration and acid-base control:
produced by metabolism, carried mainly as bicarbonate coupled to oxygen transport,
and acting as the respiratory determinant of pH alongside renal bicarbonate control
— a unifying role that makes its understanding central to anaesthesia and intensive
care.
Describe the Davenport diagram.
The Davenport diagram is a graphical way of representing acid-base status that
displays the interrelationship of the three key variables,
helping to classify and follow disturbances.
It is plotted with the plasma bicarbonate concentration on the vertical axis
against the pH on the horizontal axis,
and across the field run a series of curved lines,
each representing a constant partial pressure of carbon dioxide — the isobars.
A point on the diagram thus fixes the bicarbonate, the pH and,
by which isobar it lies on, the carbon dioxide. The normal point sits in the centre.
The different acid-base disturbances move the point in characteristic directions:
a respiratory acidosis moves it up and to the left along the buffer line as carbon
dioxide rises; a metabolic acidosis moves it down and to the left as bicarbonate
falls; and the alkaloses in the opposite directions,
with compensation shifting the point further along predictable paths.
So the Davenport diagram plots bicarbonate against pH with carbon-dioxide isobars,
so that a single point defines all three variables,
and the various respiratory and metabolic acidoses and alkaloses,
and their compensation, move the point in characteristic directions — a graphical
aid to understanding and classifying acid-base disturbances.
Explain the isohydric principle and buffering capacity.
The isohydric principle states that,
because all the buffer systems in a given solution are exposed to the same
hydrogen-ion concentration, they are all in equilibrium with one another at that
single pH, so that a change in one buffer pair is reflected in all the others.
The practical consequence is that one can assess the whole acid-base state by
examining a single buffer pair — conventionally the bicarbonate system,
through the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation — confident that it reflects the
behaviour of all the others.
The buffering capacity of a system — how much acid or base it can absorb for a
given change in pH — is greatest when the buffer is near its pK-a,
where the weak acid and conjugate base are present in similar amounts,
and when the buffer is abundant.
This is why the bicarbonate system,
though its pK-a is not ideally close to the blood pH,
is so effective — because it is abundant and open,
with independent regulation of its components.
So the isohydric principle holds that all buffers in a solution share the same pH
and are in mutual equilibrium, so one pair reflects the whole;
and buffering capacity is greatest near the pK-a and with abundance — explaining
why the bicarbonate system, conventionally used to assess acid-base status,
is so effective despite its pK-a.
Describe the renal handling of acid.
While the lungs control carbon dioxide,
the kidneys provide the slower but definitive control of acid-base balance,
by two principal tasks: reclaiming the filtered bicarbonate and excreting the fixed
acid produced by metabolism.
First, essentially all the bicarbonate filtered at the glomerulus is reabsorbed,
mainly in the proximal tubule, a process dependent on the secretion of hydrogen
ions and on carbonic anhydrase — without this the body would lose its main buffer.
Second, the kidney excretes the daily fixed-acid load:
it secretes hydrogen ions into the tubule,
but free hydrogen ions can only lower the urine pH so far,
so most acid is excreted bound to urinary buffers — chiefly phosphate,
as titratable acid, and, importantly, ammonia,
which the kidney synthesises and which traps hydrogen ions as ammonium;
in doing so the kidney generates new bicarbonate to replace that consumed in
buffering.
This renal contribution can be greatly increased in acidosis, over days.
So the kidney controls acid-base balance by reabsorbing all the filtered
bicarbonate, dependent on hydrogen-ion secretion and carbonic anhydrase,
and by excreting the fixed-acid load as titratable acid and, chiefly, as ammonium,
generating new bicarbonate — the slow but definitive renal arm of acid-base
regulation.
Work through how a respiratory and a metabolic disturbance are distinguished on a
blood gas.
I would approach an arterial blood gas systematically to distinguish the
disturbances, using the relationship between pH, carbon dioxide and bicarbonate.
First, look at the pH to see whether there is an acidaemia or an alkalaemia.
Second, look at the carbon dioxide and the bicarbonate to find which explains the
pH change — the primary disturbance.
If the pH is low and the carbon dioxide is high,
the disturbance is a respiratory acidosis, the carbon dioxide being the acid;
if the pH is low and the bicarbonate is low — a negative base excess — it is a
metabolic acidosis.
If the pH is high with a low carbon dioxide, a respiratory alkalosis;
high with a high bicarbonate, a metabolic alkalosis.
Third, look at the other value to assess compensation — whether it has moved
appropriately to limit the pH change — and judge from its degree and the clinical
picture whether the disturbance is acute or chronic, simple or mixed.
The anion gap and base excess refine a metabolic acidosis.
So a blood gas is interpreted by reading the pH for the direction,
identifying whether carbon dioxide or bicarbonate is the primary cause,
and then assessing the compensatory change in the other — distinguishing
respiratory from metabolic disturbances and simple from mixed,
a systematic skill central to anaesthesia and intensive care.
Describe the carbon dioxide narcosis seen in chronic carbon dioxide retention.
Carbon dioxide narcosis is the depression of consciousness caused by a high
arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide,
seen when the carbon dioxide rises markedly,
and it relates to the effects of carbon dioxide on the brain and to the control of
breathing.
A high carbon dioxide, through its effect on pH, depresses cerebral function,
causing drowsiness, confusion, and ultimately coma,
accompanied by other signs such as a bounding pulse,
warm peripheries and a flapping tremor from the vasodilatation and sympathetic
activation.
A particular concern arises in patients with chronic carbon dioxide retention,
as in some chronic lung disease, whose respiratory centre has become relatively
insensitive to carbon dioxide and who may rely more on their hypoxic drive to
breathe; giving such a patient a high concentration of oxygen incautiously may,
by relieving the hypoxic drive and other mechanisms,
reduce their ventilation and worsen the carbon dioxide retention,
precipitating narcosis — hence the care with oxygen in this group.
So carbon dioxide narcosis is the depression of consciousness from a high arterial
carbon dioxide, with characteristic signs of vasodilatation; in chronic retainers,
incautious high-concentration oxygen can worsen retention and precipitate it — a
caution in oxygen therapy derived from the physiology of carbon dioxide and the
control of breathing.
Describe the capnograph trace and its uses.
Capnography is the continuous measurement and display of the carbon dioxide in the
respired gas, and the capnograph trace — the plot of carbon dioxide concentration
against time through the respiratory cycle — is one of the most informative
monitors in anaesthesia.
The normal trace has a characteristic shape.
During inspiration and the start of expiration the carbon dioxide is near zero,
as the dead-space gas, free of carbon dioxide, is exhaled first — the baseline.
Then there is a steep upstroke as alveolar gas reaches the sensor,
rising to a plateau — the alveolar plateau — that slopes gently upward,
its end-point being the end-tidal carbon dioxide,
which approximates the alveolar and hence arterial value.
Inspiration then returns the trace sharply to baseline.
The trace confirms ventilation and, critically,
correct tracheal placement of a tube,
since a sustained trace indicates the tube is in the airway;
it monitors the adequacy of ventilation;
and changes in its shape or value signal problems — a falling end-tidal carbon
dioxide with reduced cardiac output or embolism,
an obstructive slope in bronchospasm, or rebreathing.
So the capnograph trace plots carbon dioxide through the respiratory cycle as a
baseline, upstroke, alveolar plateau ending in the end-tidal value, and return;
it confirms ventilation and tracheal tube placement, monitors ventilation,
and its changes signal a range of problems — a fundamental anaesthetic monitor
founded on carbon dioxide physiology.
Describe intracellular and bone buffering.
Buffering against changes in pH occurs not only in the extracellular fluid but
importantly within cells and, for chronic loads, in bone,
these contributing much of the body's total buffering capacity.
Intracellular buffering is quantitatively very important,
because the cells are a large compartment:
hydrogen ions move into or out of cells in exchange for other ions,
such as potassium, and are buffered inside by proteins, phosphates and,
in the red cell, haemoglobin.
This is why acid-base disturbances are accompanied by shifts of potassium —
acidosis tending to raise and alkalosis to lower the plasma potassium — an
important clinical link.
Bone provides a large reservoir for buffering a chronic acid load:
the mineral of bone can take up hydrogen ions, releasing calcium and other ions,
so that a chronic acidosis, as in chronic renal failure,
is buffered partly by bone, contributing over time to bone demineralisation.
So besides the extracellular buffers, intracellular buffering — by proteins,
phosphate and haemoglobin, with hydrogen-potassium exchange linking acid-base to
potassium — handles much of an acute load,
and bone buffers chronic acid loads at the cost of demineralisation;
together extending the body's defence of pH across the compartments.
Summarise the body's defence of pH across its timescales.
I would summarise the defence of pH as a layered system acting over three
timescales, from seconds to days, each more powerful and definitive than the last.
The first and immediate line is chemical buffering, acting within seconds:
the bicarbonate system in the extracellular fluid, and the protein,
phosphate and haemoglobin buffers within cells,
absorb hydrogen ions to limit the change in pH,
all linked by the isohydric principle.
The second line is respiratory, acting within minutes:
by adjusting alveolar ventilation, the lungs change the carbon dioxide and so the
pH, compensating rapidly for metabolic disturbance.
The third and definitive line is renal, acting over hours to days:
the kidneys reabsorb bicarbonate, excrete the fixed-acid load as titratable acid
and ammonium, and generate new bicarbonate,
definitively correcting the disturbance and compensating for respiratory disorders.
So the body defends its pH in three layers — immediate chemical buffering across
all compartments, rapid respiratory adjustment of carbon dioxide,
and slow but definitive renal handling of bicarbonate and acid — an integrated
defence over seconds, minutes and days that maintains the pH essential to cellular
function, and which underlies the interpretation and management of acid-base
disturbance.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Carbon dioxide is carried in three forms:
most (~60%) as bicarbonate (from its hydration and dissociation),
~30% as carbamino compounds on haemoglobin,
and ~10% dissolved (more significant than for oxygen as CO2 is far more soluble) —
the dissolved fraction exerting the partial pressure.
Second, Carbonic anhydrase in the red cell rapidly hydrates CO2 to carbonic acid,
which dissociates to bicarbonate (buffered H+ remaining on haemoglobin);
as bicarbonate leaves the cell, chloride enters to preserve neutrality — the
chloride (Hamburger) shift — reversing in the lung.
Third, The CO2 dissociation curve (content vs PCO2) is, unlike the oxygen curve,
nearly linear and steeper with no plateau, so content rises steadily with tension;
its position shifts with oxygenation — the Haldane effect:
deoxygenated haemoglobin carries more CO2 (better H+ acceptor and carbamino
former), aiding tissue uptake and pulmonary release.
Fourth, A buffer (weak acid + conjugate base) resists pH change;
the bicarbonate system (carbonic acid/bicarbonate,
described by Henderson-Hasselbalch:
pH = pKa + log [bicarbonate]/[dissolved CO2]) is the chief extracellular buffer,
uniquely powerful as CO2 and bicarbonate are independently regulated by lungs and
kidneys; haemoglobin, plasma proteins, phosphate and bone also buffer.
Fifth, CO2 carriage is central to acid-base balance (CO2 acts as an acid via the
bicarbonate system, so ventilation rapidly regulates pH) and to anaesthesia:
the anaesthetist controls ventilation and thus arterial CO2 and much of pH,
capnography is a fundamental monitor,
and the buffer systems underlie the perioperative acid-base disturbances to be
interpreted and managed.
Thank you. That concludes the station.